WHEN ORGANIZATIONS ARE IN CRISIS, IT’S
USUALLY BECAUSE THE BUSINESS IS BROKEN.

HBR.ORG
BY JAY W. LORSCH AND EMILY MCTAGUE
When organizations get into big trouble, fixing the culture is usually the prescription. That’s what most everyone said General Motors needed to do after its recall crisis in 2014—and ever since, CEO Mary Barra has been focusing on creating “the right environment” to
April 2016 Harvard Business Review 97

CULTURE IS NOT THE CULPRIT

promote accountability and head off future disasters. Pundits far and wide called for the same remedy when it came to light that the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, deemed a corrosive bureaucracy by federal investigators, kept veterans waiting months for critical health care. Cultural reform has likewise been proposed as the solution to excessive use of force by police departments, unethical behavior in banks, and just about any other major organizational problem you can think of. All eyes are on culture as the cause and the cure.
But the corporate leaders we have interviewed—current and former CEOs who have successfully led major transformations—say that culture isn’t something you “fix.” Rather, in their experience, cultural change is what you get after you’ve put new processes or structures in place to tackle tough business challenges like reworking an outdated strategy or business model. The culture evolves as you do that important work.

Though this runs counter to the going wisdom about how to turn things around at GM, the VA, and elsewhere, it makes intuitive sense to look at culture as an outcome—not a cause or a fix. Organizations are complex systems with many ripple effects. Reworking fundamental practices will inevitably lead to some new values and behaviors. Employees may start seeing their contributions to society in a whole new light. This is what happened at Ecolab when CEO Doug Baker pushed decisions down to the front lines to strengthen customer relationships. Or people might become less adversarial toward senior executives—as Northwest employees did after Delta CEO Richard Anderson acquired the airline and got workers on board by meeting their day-to-day needs.
The leaders we spoke with took different approaches for different ends. For example, Alan Mulally worked to break down barriers between units at Ford, whereas Dan Vasella did a fair amount of decentralizing to unleash creative energy at Novartis. But in every case, when the leaders used tools such as decision rights, performance measurement, and reward systems to address their particular business challenges, organizational culture evolved in interesting ways as a result, reinforcing the new direction.
Revisiting their stories provides a richer understanding of corporate transformation and culture’s

role in it, so we share highlights from our conversations here. Most of these stories involve some aspect of merger integration, one of the most difficult transitions for companies to manage. And they all show, in a range of settings, that culture isn’t a final destination. It morphs right along with the company’s competitive environment and objectives. It’s really more of a temporary landing place—where the organization should be at that moment, if the right management levers have been pulled.
DOUG BAKER
Doug Baker took over as the CEO of Ecolab, an industrial-cleaning-products company, in 2004. At the time company revenue was $4 billion, and he set out to triple that figure, a highly audacious goal. By 2014 he had completed some 50 acquisitions, most notably buying Nalco, a water treatment company based in Naperville, Illinois. Sales had grown to $14 billion, and the workforce had more than doubled.
The acquisitions allowed Ecolab to offer a more diverse set of products and services—essentially one-stop shopping—for its customers’ cleaning needs. But as it absorbed each new entity, complexity grew. Organizational layers multiplied, and managers became siloed into different offices and units. Key decision makers spent less time

98  Harvard Business Review April 2016

HBR.ORG
Business Challenge: Staying connected with customers while tripling in size Levers Pulled: Encouraged more frontline decision making and instituted a more meritocratic reward system Cultural Change: Shift from father-knows-best management to a collaborative and independent workforce
DOUG BAKER
CEO OF ECOLAB
April 2016 Harvard Business Review 99

CULTURE IS NOT THE CULPRIT
BUSINESS CHALLENGE: QUICK INTEGRATION OF A GIANT ACQUISITION DURING A DOWNTURN LEVERS PULLED: SHARED EXECUTIVE POWER, BUILT MORE-DIRECT RELATIONSHIPS WITH EMPLOYEES, AND FOCUSED ON ACCOMMODATING THEIR WORKPLACE DEVELOPMENT AND COMPENSATION NEEDS CULTURAL CHANGE: SHIFT FROM ADVERSARIAL MANAGEMENT-EMPLOYEE RELATIONSHIP TO MUTUAL LOYALTY AND TRUST
RICHARD ANDERSON
CEO OF DELTA
100 Harvard Business Review April 2016

HBR.ORG

interacting with customers and with one another.

As frontline employees were rewarded for own-

The expanding bureaucracy was eating into Ecolab’s ing customer relationships and coordinating with

customer-centric culture, and that was hurting one another, a culture of autonomy emerged. (This

the business.

also freed up senior management time, allowing

Baker wanted to restore customer focus as a core executives to focus on broader issues.) Once peo-

strength at Ecolab. The company’s model was to pro- ple throughout the ranks felt trusted, they in turn

vide on-site evaluations and training for customers trusted the company more and began to view their

and build them customized portfolios of products work and their mission—to make the world cleaner,

and services based on those visits. Many of its clients safer, and healthier—as real contributions to society.

had worked with the company for years, and it was And in their enhanced roles, they could see firsthand

essential to maintain those strong relationships.

how they were making customers’ lives better. This

The answer, Baker believed, was to encourage shift took time, though, because the process had to

more decision making on the front lines, by care- happen again and again with each acquisition.

fully training the employees who were closest to

“When we buy businesses, they’re not going

customers. The more they learned about all the to love the new company right away,” Baker says.

products and services the company provided, the “Love takes a while.”

better equipped they would be to figure out on their

own which solutions fit customers’ needs.

It may seem risky to push decisions down, but
RICHARD ANDERSON Baker found that the bad calls were caught and

fixed faster that way. Eventually, managers began to Soon after he became Delta’s CEO, Richard Anderson

let go and trust their employees—which was a huge oversaw the 2008 acquisition of Northwest, which

cultural shift. It took time to train employees, and created the world’s largest carrier, with approxi-

it required constant tweaking and reevaluation mately 70,000 employees. At the time, both airlines

as customer preferences and business dynamics were emerging from bankruptcy protection and

changed. But ultimately fostering frontline re- entering a major downturn in air travel.

sponsibility allowed Ecolab to stay connected with

Unlike Baker, who didn’t rush postmerger in-

its customers.

tegration, Anderson felt that this acquisition de-

Baker also emphasized the importance of meri- manded speed and force. He didn’t have the time

tocracy in motivating employees to carry out busi- or inclination to do any wooing. “There’s no such

ness goals. “People watch who gets promoted,” he thing as a merger of equals,” he says. “We called all

says. Advancement and other rewards were used to the shots here. It was going to be based in Atlanta; it

signal the kind of behavior that was valued at the was going to be called Delta; there was going to be

company. Baker found that public acknowledgment no joint branding. It was pretty dictatorial.”

mattered even more than financial incentives over

To quickly integrate systems, processes, and

time. “What do you call people out for, what do you people in a hugely complex industry, Anderson

celebrate, how do people get recognized by their had to empower those around him to lead. He

peers? The bonus check is not unimportant, but it is firmly believes in having a nonexecutive chairman,

silent and it’s not public,” he points out. Kudos went who oversees board agendas and processes, and a

to managers who delegated decisions to customer- separate president, who independently manages

facing employees and encouraged them to take the deals. “The president and I carry the same cachet,”

lead when they showed initiative.

Anderson says, “so we can get twice as much done.

This was especially critical at the smaller orga- He can go run the Virgin Atlantic transaction while

nizations Ecolab acquired. They included a num- I’m in China trying to work a deal with our two

ber of private companies that had a “father knows Chinese partners.” Anderson has also delegated a

best” style of management: The founders issued lot of responsibility to his chief operating officer and

the orders, and people followed them. Although chief marketing officer.

that could work in small organizations, it hindered

Because Anderson had previously served as

growth and made it difficult to collaborate across Northwest’s CEO for three and a half years, he had

divisions at Ecolab.

an insider’s view of the company—and he knew

April 2016 Harvard Business Review 101

ANDREW HARRER/GETTY IMAGES

CULTURE IS NOT THE CULPRIT

about a major obstacle he would encounter there. Northwest was highly unionized, which in his view set up an adversarial dynamic between employees and management. It also made communication between the two groups difficult. Management relied on unions to learn about employee needs as opposed to interacting with workers directly. With both management and employees going through a third party, it took longer to address issues.
That’s why a critical part of this quick integration—once Anderson had clearly laid out that Delta was running the show—was to build strong relationships with employees. So he looked for ways to satisfy them and motivate them to serve the company and its customers. He decided to focus on meeting their needs both on the job and personally. Delta offered employees first-rate training, flexible scheduling, well-maintained airplanes with world-class equipment, and good crew hotels. Those things were relatively inexpensive, especially compared with fuel—and they paid off handsomely in loyalty and trust.
Compensating people well made a difference, too—it motivated them to perform. “You want them to be very productive and work very hard and do everything right,” Anderson says, “but in return you want to provide a really good benefit system and a very good pay system.” Each year Delta earmarked 10% of its earnings before taxes and management compensation for employee bonuses. One year after the merger, the airline put 15% of the company’s equity into a stock-ownership plan for pilots, flight crews, and ground and support staff. The higher compensation demonstrated that management cared about its people, further feeding the culture of trust.
He also recognized that each employee had specific needs. Take the equipment service workers on the second shift. “It’s 10 below zero outside in Minneapolis this morning, with a blizzard, and they’ve got to get their job done,” Anderson says. “They’ve got to get up in the deicing bucket and get that airplane deiced and get off the gate.”
The bets that Anderson placed on meeting employee needs seem to have reversed the troubling “us versus management” dynamic. Two years after he took over as CEO, workers voted to get rid of unions (except for pilots, who gain industry influence from being in a union because it puts them on par with their peers at other airlines). Today Delta is

the only major airline outside the Middle East that remains largely nonunionized.
The happier workers are, the longer they want to stay. So the company’s “lifer” culture has grown even stronger, which Anderson sees as a good thing. “We have a lot of 40- or 45-year employees in this company, and they may be second or third generation,” he says. “But we don’t have a nepotism rule, because I want generations of the same family working here.” His philosophy is that having relatives of employees join Delta tends to increase loyalty all around. Those hires come in with a certain understanding and a positive view of how the company operates.
ALAN MULALLY
When Alan Mulally took the helm at Ford, in 2006, the company was on the brink of bankruptcy and had lost nearly 25% of its market share since 1990. But, having managed Boeing through a rough downturn, he knew how to make tough calls and act decisively during a crisis. At his first financial meeting at Ford, he realized that the company was just months away from running out of cash. Mulally reversed the firm’s course: By the time he left, in 2014, Ford had been reporting profits for five years, and the stock price had jumped significantly.
The challenge he faced wasn’t just financial, though. To set the company straight, he had to get the management team working more collaboratively. It was notorious for being cutthroat and aggressive. Executives from different units hid information from one another instead of sharing it. Mulally says that Ford was like a “bunch of separate companies” when he took over. Each unit made different cars, targeted different markets, and operated independently—all of which reinforced the defensive “turf” mentality and generated enormous waste.
Drawing on his experience at Boeing, Mulally instituted regular meetings where several levels of executives gathered to share updates on their units. They used a color-coded system (green for good, yellow for caution, and red for trouble) to assess Ford’s overall performance on a variety of initiatives quickly and holistically.
At the peak of the company’s problems, the group met daily. Mulally hoped the meetings would help identify issues before they became intractable and encourage executives to share ideas and support one

102  Harvard Business Review April 2016

JOCK FISTICK/GETTY IMAGES

HBR.ORG
alan mulally
FORMER CEO OF FORD
Business Challenge: Bringing a global manufacturer back from the brink of bankruptcy Levers Pulled: Increased transparency among unit heads and streamlined business processes Cultural Change: Shift from defensive and disparate to cooperative and connected business units
April 2016 Harvard Business Review 103

CULTURE IS NOT THE CULPRIT
DAN VASELLA
FORMER CEO OF NOVARTIS
BUSINESS CHALLENGE: MANAGING A MORE DIVERSE PORTFOLIO OF PRODUCTS AND CUSTOMERS LEVERS PULLED: ARTICULATED A CLEAR VISION, GOALS, AND EXPECTATIONS, AND DECENTRALIZED DECISION MAKING CULTURAL CHANGE: SHIFT FROM NARROWLY FOCUSED AND BUREAUCRATIC TO A CUSTOMER-CENTRIC AND PERFORMANCE-MINDED ORGANIZATION
104  Harvard Business Review April 2016

HBR.ORG

another. He also wanted to foster personal account- patients better medicines again and again”—spoke

ability; managers had to explain the problems they directly to the challenge of broadening the com-

had and the headway they were making.

pany’s offerings. To achieve it, Vasella increased

Mulally also launched “One Ford,” a strategy to in- spending on research and development during

tegrate Ford units around the world so that the com- his tenure.

pany could eliminate waste and streamline processes.

In those meetings, he also clearly spelled out

He created global heads for manufacturing, market- his expectations for employees. They needed to

ing, and product development to lead collaboration be flexible, for one thing. As a growing company

internationally and simplify operations.

developing new medicines, Novartis would face

With all executives working openly, as a team, challenges no one could anticipate, and the team

Mulally could more easily identify low-performing would have to roll with whatever issues came up.

brands. He sold off several of Ford’s luxury ve- And employees had to be accountable and act in the

hicle brands to focus on the production of smaller, customers’ interests.

energy-efficient vehicles, including the Fiesta and

To that end, Vasella set up clear metrics for

the Focus, which had potential to expand. Ford re- gauging performance and ensuring quality across

turned to its original mission of producing quality the company’s increasingly diverse units and prod-

cars for the masses.

uct groups. As Novartis grew, he knew, more people

At the beginning, executives were afraid to speak would need to take charge, and a good performance

up about problems—they worried that their col- management system would help keep employees

leagues would pounce on any sign of vulnerability. focused on the right things. “You also have to make

In the first several meetings, all the charts were green, it clear what you won’t tolerate,” he says. “I will

but Mulally pushed back: “We lost billions last year, not tolerate bribing. I will not tolerate bad stories

and you’re telling me that there is not a problem?” internally.”

Eventually, a few brave executives started speak-

Vasella believed that collaboration and align-

ing up, and he praised them for their transparency. ment across divisions should not be forced in a

(One of them was Mark Fields, who would succeed growing company, so he decentralized decision

Mulally as CEO.) In time people realized that being making to empower people to do what was best for

honest allowed them to work together and find solu- their own units. He felt that this allowed teams to

tions more quickly, and their charts reflected what move faster and to think and act more creatively.

was really happening in their units.

“My view was to focus on the outside—on the com-

petition and the customers,” he says. “Don’t get

inhibited or slow down because of concerns about

DAN VASELLA

whether you’re behaving in a collaborative way with people you don’t need to collaborate with for

After Dan Vasella orchestrated the merger between your results.”

Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy, in 1996, he was named chief

As the new practices were implemented, Novartis

executive of the combined company, Novartis. It employees became more customer-centric and per-

eventually became the largest producer of pharma- formance-minded at the same time. “First you have

ceuticals in the world.

to deliver to your customers what they hope for

To meet a broader range of customer needs— [better medicines and vaccines],” Vasella says, “and

and better insulate the company—Vasella led the then you can ask for a return for what you deliver.”

shift from a prescription-drug-based business With each organizational change he made, he re-

to a diversified portfolio of health care products. alized that the company’s culture was starting to

This major transformation required a much more match the vision he’d outlined in his early meetings

complex organization.

with senior executives.  

For Vasella, leading change started with a clear 

HBR Reprint R1604H

sense of purpose at the top. He had a series of early discussions with a small group of senior managers to establish the company’s vision and objectives. The chief goal—“to discover, develop, and bring to

Jay W. Lorsch is the Louis E. Kirstein Professor of Human Relations at Harvard Business School. Emily McTague is a research associate at Harvard Business School.

April 2016 Harvard Business Review 105

ADRIAN MOSER/GETTY IMAGES

Copyright 2016 Harvard Business Publishing. All Rights Reserved. Additional restrictions may apply including the use of this content as assigned course material. Please consult your institution's librarian about any restrictions that might apply under the license with your institution. For more information and teaching resources from Harvard Business Publishing including Harvard Business School Cases, eLearning products, and business simulations please visit hbsp.harvard.edu.

